Here
in this remote northwestern corner of
China is a town at the center of the
country's AI ambitions.
>> We are going to uh go there to see how
is the construction going and basically
get a better understanding of how these
data centers fit in with the overall
strategy for China to build its AI
capabilities.
>> The Shinjang region is sensitive.
China's been accused of human rights
abuses against its ethnic Weaguer
population. Foreign journalists who go
here are monitored. There seems to be a
white car following us. Not sure what it
is.
>> This barren area is becoming central to
China's push for AI supremacy over the
US.
A Bloomberg News investigation has
revealed these data centers aim to
install more than 115,000
high-end USD designed chips. Chips which
are supposed to be banned from entering
China. I found that there's one local
government in Shing Jang which approved
more than 30 investment project late
last year and these investment project
all Intel using high-end chips from
Nvidia.
>> These are chips that China has not been
able to access for multiple years. The
documents contain no explanation of how
they would get the chips. You can only
legally send those chips to China with a
US government license. So, are these
companies bluffing? Or can Chinese data
centers readily get their hands on the
world's most restricted semiconductors?
If this development goes as planned and
they are filled with these kinds of
chips, it just goes to show how
difficult or really impossible it is to
stop Chinese companies, government
entities from buying these things.
In order to uh investigate what was
happening, my colleague James Major and
myself, we decided to fly out to Shing
Jang. And where we were going was a
little bit uh more to the north. The Wu
County, which is the epicenter of the
data centers, is another two-hour drive.
>> Billions of dollars in data centers are
being built in this remote area. This is
key infrastructure in China's push to
become a global leader in AI by 2030.
For the last decade, Beijing's invested
heavily in high-tech industries, and
some are starting to pay off. Chinese AI
startup Deep Seek has rocked global
technology stocks, really raising
questions over America's tech dominance.
>> For the first time, a Bloomberg
investigation has exposed the scale of
China's AI buildout in the Northwestern
desert and the potential role of banned
US chips.
>> Based on my data analysis and data
sourcing, I found that China is building
huge data centers in Shing Jang. The
data center will use Nvidia servers and
chips.
>> Project approval documents show local
governments in Shing Jang and in
neighboring Ting High have green lit a
total of 39 data centers that intend to
use more than 115,000
banned Nvidia processors.
Nvidia H100 and H200 chips are the
industrial standard for training large
language models. A US ban was supposed
to keep them out of China, but
Bloomberg's been unable to verify
whether the data centers actually have
access to these chips. It's possible the
companies are making claims they can't
deliver.
>> Chinese companies sometimes have a
pattern of pursuing the start of
infrastructure projects that are not
ultimately completed. But you also have
to take seriously that these documents
say that they want to do this and that
the construction is happening in a
region that has a lot of the other
resources and infrastructure necessary
to support an AI data center buildout.
>> Initially, the data centers were happy
to invite us in to see their server
rooms, but the invitation was quickly
revoked. We originally agreed with one
of the companies that they would speak
to us and they would even allow us to go
inside the the construction site to see
how it's progressing, but at the last
minute that visit was cancelled. Without
getting inside the data centers and
seeing their hardware, it's difficult to
know for sure whether they have the
chips they claim. The US has effectively
banned those chips from export to China
since 2022. They can do this because the
most advanced chips are designed in the
US and controlled by US law.
>> The restrictions are really on advanced
semiconductors that could have um
potential military applications and the
goal is really to sort of choke uh
China's AI sector and and its broader AI
ambitions.
>> The US wants to maintain its
technological edge and keeping advanced
chips out of China is critical to
achieving that. America is the country
that started the AI race. And as
president of the United States, I'm here
today to declare that America is going
to win it. But despite the tough talk,
the White House has loosened some
restrictions.
In July, it announced it would allow an
inferior chip called the H20 to be
exported to China. Not to be confused
with the H100 and H200, this chip is
good enough to be competitive, but
inferior enough to keep China a
generation behind in chip design.
These data centers challenge US policy
because they claim to be able to get
over 115,000
of the most restricted chips. But can
they? I talked to more than a dozen
people who are familiar with US
government investigations into this
issue over the past handful of years and
my question to them was are you aware of
a smuggling network that is capable of
procuring over a 100,000 banned Nvidia
chips into China and all of them said
no. Meanwhile, Nvidia say there's no
evidence their advanced chips are being
smuggled into China and argue even if
they were, it wouldn't work because
keeping the chips running requires
Nvidia's technical support, which
they're not offering.
>> The question is, are the Chinese
companies capable of procuring these
models on a grand enough scale to
fulfill these ambitions that are crucial
to Beijing's AI agenda? Bloomberg News
has not found evidence that China has
amassed or can amass such large numbers
of banned Nvidia chips. Yet in EW, the
construction goes on. If these data
centers actually are going to be
completed and can get the amount of
chips they specified in the investment
plans, then it proved that US
governments so far has not been able to
stop China developing their high-tech
and especially AI industry from the
supply side.
This is the Nvidia H100 Hopper GPU. Long
the most sought after chip in the world.
This small square has 80 billion
transistors inside and is designed for
machine learning. It's critical hardware
if you want to develop AI tools. And it
was banned from export to China by US
authorities before it was even launched
in 2022.
>> The way US officials describe this is a
small yard high fence. So their aim is
really to not disrupt the entire
semiconductor ecosystem and the entire
semiconductor industry, but really focus
on choking off a sort of advanced
semiconductors that could be used for AI
applications from getting into China.
China's created a colossal $ 48 billion
semiconductor investment fund to build
up its chip manufacturing. But despite
the money, it still can't match other
manufacturers.
The precision required is so advanced.
It's it's kind of like landing on the
moon, I would say. And I don't think
that's an overstatement at all. It
requires, you know, the use of uh very
specific lasers through sort of a web of
mirrors. Um and the technology is really
mindboggling. It's very very difficult
to do. You know, even if China is trying
very hard, they're still multiple
generations behind. So I think that
really creates obviously a very high in
demand product. This Bloomberg
investigation shows despite the advances
in Chinese semiconductor manufacturing
by the likes of Huawei, Chinese firms
still aspire to buy massive volumes of
banned Nvidia chips.
>> One Nvidia's H100 chips can achieve
maybe three to four times more of the
computing power from the local design
chips. So that's how Nvidia chips has
been sought after in China.
>> By Huawei's own account and that of
several US government officials, the
best Chinese chip, the Huawei Ascend
series, is still at least a generation
behind.
>> China's chip manufacturing is still
playing catchup. When or even if China
can equal the US is a hotly contested
issue. But in spite of the technical
hurdles, China's AI models are beating
expectations. Deepseek upended the
perception of Chinese AI overnight. The
company claimed it had used lower
efficiency chips, ones that were legal
to sell to China for almost a year to
train its large language model, but not
everyone's so sure.
>> Washington suspects that they may have
had access to H100s, and Deep Seek has
also expressed interest in these
facilities that theoretically would
contain H100s. They don't need them.
They obviously want them.
>> An employee of one of the large
investors in the EW site told Bloomberg
Deepseek has already expressed interest
in cooperating. Bloomberg reached out to
Deepseek for comment, but they did not
respond. China's technology ambitions
might begin at home, but they spread
around the world.
>> China really wants to lead the world
here. Uh not just, you know, close the
development gap with the US, but be a
leader. They really want the rest of the
world and especially the global south
and emerging markets to really be
relying on Chinese AI technology and
using Chinese AI products and relying on
their AI infrastructure.
>> But China's strategic rival across the
Pacific is also investing colossal sums
in AI. Nvidia alone has promised half a
trillion dollars of investment in US
chip manufacturing.
So how do these desert data centers
compare? Can China really match up
against the US?
>> For comparison, we have 115,000 some
chips across these two complexes in the
Chinese desert. the first data center
for Stargate, which is this Trumpbacked
OpenAI endeavor with a bunch of other
American companies to build a whole
bunch of data centers on American soil,
would involve 400,000 of Nvidia's best
chips, the generation ahead of the
models that the Chinese companies are
seeking.
>> But these sites represent just the tip
of China's data center iceberg. Sites
like this are being built across the
country. Deep Seek took the world by
surprise, and China's hoping it can do
it again.
[Music]